[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>When I was a young
boy in England,
there was a
television commercial
that helped to instruct
the young children in how
to cross the road safely,
crossing the street.
It was called "The Green Cross
Code," which asked everyone
crossing a street, first of
all, to stop, look, and listen.
And this was the
most important thing
to ensure we traversed
the road safely.
[HORN HONKS]
>>That wasn't very
clever, was it?
If you'd been looking and
listening all the way across,
that wouldn't have happened.
>>Today, for us, in
deeper considerations
of life and spiritual
reality, this
is still most excellent
advice I find,
because if we forget to
stop and look and listen,
we miss things.
We risk undervaluing ourselves.
We tend to misconceive reality.
Always being busy affords us
very little time to contemplate
anything big or small.
Although it is
tacitly understood
to be a sign of a
successful modern life,
in spiritual
development, being busy
all the time is no good at all.
We are miscalculating if
we are doing it habitually.
We need to cultivate a
contemplative state of being--
being as a daily practice.
As well as being able to do
and process and articulate
an action, we must be able
to step back, take a moment,
bring our hands together,
breathe, and do nothing.
In the moment of
nothing arises a truth,
a clear perception into
whatever is in front of us.
If we are busy, we miss it.
The contemplative
faculty is essential
to our spiritual lucidity.
Whatever we are,
whatever we are doing,
there is nothing else
that we ought to be doing.
Now if we have
made an appointment
to meet with a friend for
dinner or catch a train
or deliver a baby or
go to the theater,
that is rather a
different thing.
But I mean nine out
of 10 times when
we are going about
our general business
in the world, when we
are doing things in life.
You see, many people have
this nagging suspicion
in the back of their heads that
they should be doing something
more productive, something
that delivers a greater yield
or has a tangible product,
something different to what
they're currently doing.
This is particularly
prevalent if we
are doing things that
are not typically
what we'd call work, things
without commercial value--
being in the garden, drawing
the clouds in the sky,
watching the hawks in the
woods, reading old poetry.
All the while in the
background, for many people,
there is a vague sensation
that something is wrong.
They should be doing something
more structured that actually
produces a formal development
or product or service,
a task with a measured outcome.
Those are the
things that matter.
Aren't they just the only
things that really count?
Spiritual development
tells us, of course,
that this is all hogwash.
It is a silly fantasy
propagated by empire
to keep people showing up to
the offices and their factories.
It comes, it derives from a
very dysfunctional distortion
of the original
Protestant work ethic,
from a time when hard
work was considered godly,
which it certainly can be.
And the lack of productivity
was equated with idleness,
which was devilish.
To not work was
sinful, and it had
to be a formally
sanctioned kind of work,
not just any old thing.
The global economic system
still supports this very harmful
model, so whilst
long ago, it might
have been true that unless
you were doing something
useful on the wagon
train, you were
dead weight and a burden
to your companions, today
that is largely irrelevant.
So what about when we have
satisfied the responsibilities
that we've created in life?
What about when everything
is in satisfactory order
to our own personal approval?
There is no indebtedness of
any kind, no obligations,
no chores, no duties.
Then what?
Can we be OK doing
nothing, to simply be?
Or do we still secretly
feel that we should be doing
something more constructive?
Have we been so indoctrinated
that the idea of doing nothing
feels like we are committing
a quiet but unseemly crime?
What if the truth is
that no one on the planet
can possibly determine the value
of what you were doing or not
doing?
What if there really
is no official arbiter
of the price of our actions?
What if, indeed, all our
actions have equal value,
whether we are washing clothes
with stones at the river
or tapping keyboards
in Wall Street?
What if it were all
the same in the end?
What if we didn't have
to do anything at all?
All we had to do was to
choose what responsibilities
we wanted, who we wanted to
be with, what time we needed
for ourselves.
What if nothingness is part
of a genuine human life,
that, indeed, long
periods of nothingness
are a significant part of
our spiritual development?
There are many things
that we could be doing.
But there is nothing
that we should be doing.
Only we ourselves can determine
the appropriateness of what we
are doing in any given moment.
One moment is rather the
same as another, is it not?
What we do with it is up to us.
Strictly speaking at the
super zoomed out level,
there is no wrong or right
on this, only choice.
The greatest ignorance
is to believe
that we have no choice,
the great crime,
or to be corralled
into choosing unwisely
what we do with our life, to
do things we don't want to do,
things we are not good at,
things we care very little for.
This would be a very sad
and unnecessary waste
of our precious time.
We need to be very aware of
this, especially young people,
like the children who were asked
to stop and look and listen.
Perhaps, that should
continue throughout life.
It can help us to decide things
with forethought and insight
to make good choices,
and every time something
goes horribly wrong,
we see that it is often
throughout our own
unwise choices.
Every choice has a payload.
Every rash and ignorant
decision will bring consequences
every time.
Every excellent
and wise decision
will bring harmony and
abundance to our door.
There is no randomness
here, no coincidence,
no look, just choice.
Life is open.
All of it is accessible
to all of us.
We may start far from
the core of what we want,
but nobody stops us from taking
whatever pathway we want,
except ourselves.
The only restrictions
are the ones
we consent to, especially at
that time of the fourth cycle,
21 years of age.
It all opens up.
There is nothing limiting us
that we have not agreed to
and summoned into our
circle of experience.
If your life is full
of confusion and pain,
you made it that way.
If your life is
lucid and fulfilling,
you made it that way.
Whether the waves of life
soothe you or loom over
you is decided by the
fidelity of your consciousness
and your willingness to grow.
We image things into being by
either concealing ourselves
from reality or by
meeting it head on.
Most people spend their
lives strategizing to conceal
themselves from the world.
For the spiritually alive human
being, this isn't acceptable.
Full and unreserved
engagement is the only way
to willfully shape reality.
It is absolutely the
case that we magnetize
what we need into our
life-- dysfunction
and agony just as much
as harmony and elation.
There are no wrongdoings
or karmic penances,
nothing of the sort.
We bring to us what
we want to examine.
Karma is a reminder of the
curriculum we asked for.
If we want to examine
a disease, we get it.
We want to examine
love, we fall into it.
If we want to
resolve aggression,
we must first embody it
before we can transmute it.
To know art, it most
flow in our dreams
before it can flow
into our paint.
We live it, dream it, bleed it.
For those who knowingly
mix their seed and egg
in the creation of new entities,
this is what you chose to do.
However apparently
planned or unplanned,
the presence of children
is always as it must be.
If you go over Niagara Falls
in a barrel or win $10 million
in Las Vegas, you chose it.
No randomness.
Our laughter and our tears
allow us to materialize.
Nobody can ever force
it, unless we allow it.
To stop and look
and listen gives us
the silence and stillness
for wisdom to arise.
In a state a faultless,
natural human serenity,
we see things with
a degree of clarity
that can never be achieved
amid the frantic knowings
of complex doings.
We bring into sharp
focus that very question.
What are we supposed to do?
Are we supposed to do
something in particular?
We could be a cellist, a
surgeon, a yoga teacher,
a parent, an accountant, a
carpenter, or just someone
walking in the wilderness.
Are those things wildly
different in value?
Philosophically speaking,
do any of these callings
have any greater inherent
worth than any of the others?
The answer is no, they do not.
Now if you want to listen to the
cello being played exquisitely,
there are few things
better than to listen
to a virtuoso player performing
Bach live in a German concert
hall.
Wonderful.
If you need a vulgar little
tumor removed from your body,
a skilled surgeon is
really a marvelous thing.
To learn yoga is so much
more fun and effective
and satisfying with a
skilled teacher in the room
to properly instruct you.
To be a parent-- goodness me.
What a life of
learning that entails.
What wisdom is exchanged
between infant and adult.
And all the other things we
might do to shape numbers,
to shape wood, to explore
the ancient streets
of an old European city,
to take photographs,
to write a brilliant novel--
what do these things add up to
in the cosmic order?
Many people want to discover
what their thing is,
their special, unique passion.
This is me.
This is what I do.
This is what I am.
And then they
think, knowing this,
then they'll be ready, ready to
finally grasp life, really go
for it, to drink long and deep.
It seems to them that by
knowing exactly what to do,
their achievement
would be great.
They would have iron will.
They could go
anywhere, do anything,
and really leave a mark in
life that makes a difference.
And this implies the
reverse situation, too.
What if you're not doing what
you're supposed to be doing?
What if you've got it wrong?
Are you wasting time and life?
Have you forfeited
your magical gifts?
Are you horribly off track?
How on earth do we know what
we're supposed to be doing?
I would like to propose
an answer to you today.
We are supposed to do one
thing and one thing only--
to witness.
This is our single
task-- to witness
with mind, heart, and will what
is occurring around and through
us.
Everything else is optional,
arbitrary, and elective.
It doesn't really matter.
Witness is it.
Some people worry that just
witnessing is not enough.
It might seem too passive
or inactive somehow.
It isn't doing anything.
Well, do you know what
it means to bear witness?
It means to show by your very
existence the truth of a thing.
To me, this is a
beautiful way to live.
There could be nothing
more visceral in this life.
Some mystical philosophies
suggest that the creator cannot
see here what is being made
by interstellar processes,
chemicals, angels,
equations, supernovas, magic,
whatever miraculous cosmic
cookery you wish for cannot be
seen by the creator.
What is made in the 3D can
only be envisaged fully
by sentient beings
embodied in it.
Enmeshed and composed
from its materials,
lucid entities chronicle
the dynamics of life.
They are pilgrims
of the mystery.
Our witnessing is deep,
active, reciprocal.
As we live, we record.
As we think, we load our visions
into the universe itself,
or what is sometimes
referred to as the A field,
a giant cosmic hard
drive that is embedded
into the black space itself.
Every little whisper is heard.
The most subtle
reveries are unspoken.
Ponderings we think are
gone forever are not gone.
The most enormous achievements
hewn into the granite face
of life, all of them know that
tiny dreams of snoozing voles
nestled in oak leaves, the
exquisite articulations
of giant blue whales gliding
through the Pacific Ocean.
All of it, all of
these witnesses
are seen, valued, cherished.
We are treasured in the
nations of the divine.
We live and see.
This is what we do.
This is our job.
The deeper we look
into ourselves,
the deeper we can look
into the cosmos being
greater servants of the divine.
And then one day, one
revolution of a million
stars later, we go home and
turn the pages of our adventure
and offer our utterly distinct
and perfectly singular
testimony.
To really witness a thing we
have to become merged with it.
To know its root, we have
to interweave our root.
We go to our origins together.
Do join me next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]